Multiphysics Modeling of Thermo-Viscoelastic
Damage in Functionally Graded Abradable
Coatings with Probabilistic Geometric Tolerance
Analysis
Amjad El-Mellouhi1, Yassine Adjal2, Khaled Dhibi3,
Fedwa El-Mellouhi3*
1Polytechnique Montr´eal, Montr´eal, Qu´ebec, Canada.
2Department of Maritime Engineering, University of Sciences and
Technology Mohamed Boudiaf, BP 1505 El M’naouer, Oran, Algeria.
3College of Science and Engineering, Hamad Bin Khalifa University,
Doha, PoBox 34110, Qatar.
*Corresponding author(s). E-mail(s): felmellouhi@hbku.edu.qa;
Contributing authors: amjad.el-mellouhi@polymtl.ca;
yassine.adjal@univusto.dz; kdhibi@hbku.edu.qa;
Abstract
In aircraft engines, functionally graded abradable coatings are used to con-
trol blade-tip clearance, but their durability is governed by effects that are
often treated separately in existing models, including temperature-dependent
viscoelastic softening, progressive damage, deposition-induced microstructural
modulation, and geometric tolerances. Models that consider these effects
independently may underestimate damage initiation because smooth material
gradients evaluated at nominal geometry cannot capture the local stress concen-
trations produced by microstructural modulation and geometric variability. This
study integrates these effects within a unified multiphysics–probabilistic frame-
work. The solved domain is a local through-thickness coating column driven by
prescribed strain and temperature histories that include thermal eigenstrain and
coating–substrate expansion mismatch. The results show that periodic property
modulation increases end-of-cycle damage relative to the monotonic gradient
and concentrates the maximum stress within a localized modulation crest. Prop-
agating symmetric geometric tolerances through the coupled solver produces
a strongly right-skewed damage distribution and a higher classification-level
1
arXiv:2608.08116v1  [cond-mat.mes-hall]  8 Aug 2026


exceedance probability for the modulated gradient than for the monotonic gradi-
ent. This exceedance behavior cannot be obtained from a deterministic analysis
performed at nominal geometry. The exceedance probability is also evaluated as a
continuous function of the classification level to assess the sensitivity of the com-
parison to the selected screening criterion. The implementation is verified through
spatial and temporal refinement, closed-form unit tests, nested Monte Carlo con-
vergence with Wilson confidence intervals, and a hold-out-validated polynomial
response surface. Numerical verification is clearly distinguished from experimen-
tal validation, and the simulated case is presented as a generic benchmark rather
than an identified material model. The framework links deposition parameters
and tolerance bands to damage-exceedance risk, supporting reliability-oriented
screening of graded and multilayer coating systems.
Keywords: Abradable coatings, Functionally graded materials,
Thermo-viscoelasticity, Damage evolution, Geometric tolerances, Monte Carlo
simulation, Reliability analysis, Turbine labyrinth seals
1 Introduction
Labyrinth seals equipped with abradable coatings are critical elements in modern air-
craft gas turbines, ensuring effective dynamic sealing while limiting wear of rotating
components [1–3]. The rubbing behaviour of labyrinth seals against abradable inlet lin-
ers has been characterized experimentally in dedicated rub-rig campaigns, notably in
the systematic study of Pychynski on honeycomb inlet liners [4], which documents the
coupling between incursion kinematics, contact forces and frictional heating that moti-
vates the equivalent prescribed histories adopted here. Because sealing performance
directly influences leakage losses, clearance control, and thermal margins, the thermo-
mechanical response of abradable coatings has a direct impact on engine efficiency,
durability, and operational safety [3, 5, 6]. Continued increases in operating temper-
atures, reduced functional clearances, and longer service intervals have progressively
pushed conventional coating architectures to their performance limits [7, 8].
From a mechanics standpoint, abradable coatings exhibit a coupled response driven
by temperature-dependent thermo-viscoelasticity and progressive degradation under
cyclic thermo-mechanical loading. This coupling induces evolving stress redistributions
and localized damage accumulation that govern early crack initiation and durabil-
ity. However, many existing numerical approaches remain based on linear viscoelastic
formulations and/or global damage laws [9–11], which can be insufficient to resolve
localized stress concentrations and the associated spatial evolution of damage, espe-
cially under strongly heterogeneous material fields [5, 6, 8]. The viscoelastic memory
effects and their interaction with progressive stiffness degradation require a tightly
coupled formulation that resolves both temporal stress relaxation and spatial damage
localization [9, 12].
Functionally graded materials (FGMs) have emerged as a promising design
strategy, as their continuous through-thickness variation of mechanical and ther-
mal properties can reduce discontinuities and mitigate stress concentrations [13–15].
2


Prior investigations have shown that graded architectures may improve damage tol-
erance and reduce peak stresses compared with homogeneous or sharply layered
coatings [13, 14]. Nevertheless, most modeling studies assume idealized monotonic
gradients and overlook periodic microstructural modulations induced by deposition
processes [16, 17]. Such deposition-driven heterogeneities can create local stiffness con-
trasts that amplify stresses and trigger early damage initiation, yet they are rarely
incorporated explicitly in continuum-scale analyses [18–20].
In addition to material heterogeneity, manufacturing and assembly processes
inevitably introduce geometric tolerances in labyrinth seals [5, 12, 16, 18, 21]. Even
small dimensional deviations can lead to significant variability in local contact con-
ditions and thermo-mechanical fields, thereby affecting stress hotspots and damage
accumulation. Although probabilistic methods are well established in structural relia-
bility analysis [13, 22, 23], their integration into thermo-viscoelastic damage modeling
of abradable coatings remains limited, despite the fact that rare worst-case geometries
may dominate reliability and maintenance risk.
Addressing these gaps requires more than combining established ingredients; the
key advance lies in their unified treatment. When periodic property modulation and
geometric tolerances are resolved simultaneously within a single thermo-viscoelastic
damage solver, they interact in ways that neither analysis can capture independently.
In particular, the spatially varying property field governs local stress concentra-
tions that drive damage, while geometric tolerances perturb the prescribed equivalent
mechanical excitation. Their coupled propagation through the damage solver pro-
duces nonlinear stress and damage distributions that cannot be obtained by treating
the material architecture and the geometric deviations separately [18, 21, 22]. As
a result, probabilistic stress and damage predictions reflect the nonlinear interac-
tion between the deterministic modulated property field and the sampled geomet-
ric deviations. Embedding these effects within one computational pipeline enables
manufacturing-informed design decisions: functional-gradient exponents, deposition-
modulation amplitudes, and dimensional-tolerance bands can be screened against
quantified damage-exceedance probabilities, thereby linking manufacturing parame-
ters directly to structural reliability metrics in a way that prior decoupled approaches
do not provide [16, 18, 23].
The individual modeling ingredients, Prony-series viscoelasticity, scalar damage
mechanics, functional grading, and Monte Carlo reliability analysis, are each well
established in the literature [5, 9, 14, 22]. The novelty of the present contribution
lies in three aspects of their integration: (i) periodic microstructural modulation is
embedded directly in the constitutive property field rather than introduced as an
external perturbation, so its influence on damage is captured self-consistently through
the coupled solver [19, 20]; (ii) geometric tolerances are propagated through the full
multiphysics chain rather than through a reduced surrogate, preserving the fidelity of
local stress and damage predictions under dimensional variability [21, 23]; and (iii) the
resulting probabilistic outputs, including exceedance probabilities, sensitivity indices,
and worst-case configurations, are expressed in forms that can be used directly for
tolerance specification and maintenance planning [22, 24]. Although demonstrated
here for abradable coatings in turbine labyrinth seals, the mathematical structure is
3


sufficiently general to apply to other graded or layered systems subjected to cyclic
thermo-mechanical loading in which deposition-induced heterogeneity and dimensional
variability jointly govern performance, including thermal barrier coatings, environmen-
tal barrier coatings for ceramic-matrix composites, and functionally graded structural
components in aerospace and energy applications [15, 25].
This study aligns closely with themes central to advanced materials and manu-
facturing research. The framework follows a quantitative process–structure–property–
performance chain: deposition-process parameters govern microstructural modulation
(structure), which in turn shapes local stiffness and stress fields (property), ultimately
influencing damage accumulation and service reliability (performance). Manufacturing
variability is introduced explicitly through probabilistic tolerance propagation [18, 24],
yielding reliability metrics that can support tolerance specification, quality-control
objectives, and condition-based maintenance planning [21, 26]. By linking materials
response, manufacturing-induced variability, and reliability-oriented design within a
unified framework, the present work responds to the growing need for process-aware
and uncertainty-quantified modeling tools in advanced coating manufacturing [15, 16].
To address these gaps, this work proposes a unified multiphysics modeling
framework that couples: (i) temperature-dependent thermo-viscoelasticity using a
Prony-series representation [3, 5, 6, 12]; (ii) a stress-driven scalar damage formulation
governed by a critical stress threshold [8, 9]; (iii) a periodically modulated functional
gradient to represent deposition-induced microstructural heterogeneity [16, 19, 20];
and (iv) probabilistic propagation of geometric tolerances using Monte Carlo simu-
lations [18, 21, 22]. This integrated approach enables prediction of both the nominal
response and the variability of localized stress and damage metrics, thereby support-
ing reliability-oriented assessment and design guidance for next-generation abradable
coatings.
Because the credibility of a multiphysics framework depends on what it does not
claim as much as on what it computes, the status of every ingredient is declared here
and maintained consistently throughout the paper.
The physical system of interest is a labyrinth-seal stage in which relative radial
motion between the sealing teeth and the coated counter-face may close the running
clearance and produce a localized rubbing region. In that physical system, normal
pressure, tangential traction, frictional heating, and material removal are all real phe-
nomena. The solved domain in this work, however, is a local through-thickness coating
column divided into perfectly bonded homogenized subdomains and driven by pre-
scribed temperature and equivalent normal-strain histories, denoted by T(z, t) and
εapp(t), respectively. The reduced solver contains no tangential degree of freedom, no
sliding interface, no contact-pressure calculation, no Coulomb friction coefficient, and
no material-removal kinetics. Consequently, no wear depth, incursion depth, or service
life is reported as a computed quantity anywhere in this manuscript. Table 2 states
this modeling boundary for each quantity, and Fig. 2 presents the physical system and
the solved domain separately.
The simulated case is a declared generic benchmark. Its parameter set is literature-
consistent for thermally sprayed AlSi-based abradable systems but is not presented as
an identified material model for a specific coating. Damage parameters are anchored
4


on published elevated-temperature data (Section 4.3); the extension of the benchmark
cycle beyond the calibration temperature is a constitutive model-based extrapolation,
evaluated as a severe numerical case rather than as experimental validation under
that condition. Throughout the paper, numerical verification, including refinement
studies, unit tests, sampling convergence, and surrogate cross-checking, is reported
and explicitly distinguished from experimental validation, which remains future work.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the
proposed framework. Section 3 presents the theoretical formulation of the coupled
thermo-viscoelastic–damage model with graded and periodically modulated prop-
erties. Section 4 describes the numerical implementation, the verification studies,
and the probabilistic tolerance framework. Section 5 discusses deterministic trends
and probabilistic response distributions. Section 6 summarizes practical implications,
limitations, and perspectives for future developments. Section 7 concludes the paper.
2 Proposed Framework
Fig. 1 summarizes the proposed multiphysics–probabilistic framework for predicting
the thermo-mechanical response and reliability of labyrinth-seal abradable coatings
under cyclic thermo-mechanical loading. The purpose of the framework is not only
to compute nominal stress and damage fields, but also to propagate manufacturing-
induced variability through the full model so that design decisions can be informed
by both expected response and reliability risk. In this sense, the proposed approach
acts as an integrated design-assessment and reliability-evaluation tool rather than as
a stand-alone constitutive or numerical model.
The
framework
is
designed
to
capture
four
coupled
durability
drivers:
(i) temperature-dependent thermo-viscoelastic deformation described through a
Prony-series, or generalized Maxwell, representation [5, 6, 12]; (ii) progressive spatial
damage evolution governed by a stress-driven scalar damage law [8, 9]; (iii) deposition-
induced periodic microstructural heterogeneity superimposed on the functional
gradient [16, 17]; and (iv) geometric tolerance variability that affects the local pre-
scribed excitation and the resulting stress hot spots, propagated using Monte Carlo
simulation [18, 22]. Their integration enables direct mapping from manufacturing
choices and dimensional dispersion to stress localization, damage accumulation, and
exceedance risk, thereby strengthening the process–structure–property–performance
interpretation of the framework.
• Stage 0: Inputs and problem definition. The workflow starts from three input
groups: (i) nominal configuration, including seal geometry, interfaces, and boundary
definitions (Section 3.1, Fig. 2); (ii) loading history, including the thermal cycle
and the corresponding prescribed equivalent mechanical excitation (Section 3.1.3,
Fig. 3); and (iii) material architecture, represented by the baseline through-thickness
grading law. These inputs define the initial process and design space from which
both deterministic response and variability-aware reliability assessment are derived.
• Stage 1: Property-field construction. A material-field generator combines:
(i) the baseline functional gradient, (ii) periodic modulation representing deposition-
induced microstructural oscillations [16, 17], and (iii) temperature dependence of
5


viscoelastic parameters [5, 12]. The output is a temperature-aware spatial property
map passed to the deterministic solver. This stage explicitly links manufacturing-
induced heterogeneity to the local constitutive description of the coating, allowing
process-driven microstructural modulation to influence local stiffness, stress redis-
tribution, and subsequent damage evolution.
• Stage 2: Deterministic multiphysics core. The deterministic core solves the
coupled problem over the prescribed cycle: thermo-viscoelastic response via a Prony-
series representation [5, 6, 12], including the thermal eigenstrain and the coating–
substrate expansion mismatch of Section 3.4, and progressive stiffness degradation
via a stress-driven scalar damage model [8, 9]. As a result, the framework captures
how local stiffness evolution, stress redistribution, and damage localization interact
over time under coupled thermo-mechanical loading. This stage provides the nominal
stress–damage response against which the effect of manufacturing variability can be
assessed.
• Stage 3: Probabilistic tolerance propagation. Geometric tolerances are mod-
eled probabilistically and sampled to generate N realizations [18]. The deterministic
core is evaluated for each realization, with the simulations parallelizable across
samples, producing response distributions and reliability statistics [22]. This step
extends the analysis beyond nominal predictions by quantifying how manufactur-
ing and assembly dispersion affect durability risk. Because each sampled geometry
is propagated through the full multiphysics solver, the resulting reliability metrics
preserve the coupled influence of material heterogeneity, boundary perturbations,
stress localization, and damage evolution. A polynomial response surface is addi-
tionally trained and independently validated against the same solver, and is used
as a cross-check and screening tool rather than as a replacement for the reference
estimator (Section 4.4).
• Stage 4: Outputs. The framework delivers deterministic outputs, including
stress/strain fields, damage maps, effective stiffness evolution, and hot-spot localiza-
tion, together with probabilistic outputs, including variability envelopes, exceedance
probabilities, sensitivity indices, and worst-case configurations [18, 22]. Collectively,
these outputs support manufacturing-informed design, tolerance control, coating-
architecture optimization, and reliability-oriented decision-making for abradable
coating systems. In particular, they provide quantitative links between process
parameters, geometric tolerances, local damage risk, and maintenance-relevant
reliability metrics.
3 Theoretical Modeling
3.1 Material system, physical configuration, and model scope
3.1.1 Material system and baseline properties
The reference material family is a thermally sprayed AlSi-based abradable system,
in which an aluminium–silicon matrix is combined with a soft dislocator phase such
as hexagonal boron nitride (hBN), representative of abradable seals used in the com-
pressor sections of aero-engines [3, 27]. As-sprayed coatings of this family are strongly
6


Inputs
– Nominal seal geometry
– Prescribed thermal +
mechanical histories
– Baseline FGM profile
Property-field construc-
tion
– Functional gradient (FGM)
– Periodic modulation
– Temperature dependence
Coupled solver
– Thermo-viscoelasticity
– Thermal eigenstrain
– Stress-driven damage
Deterministic outputs
– Stress/strain fields
– Damage evolution maps
– Hot-spot localization
Deterministic multiphysics core
Tolerance model
– Clearance/offset deviations
– Manufacturing bounds
– Assembly limits
Monte Carlo sampling
– Sample geometries δu
– Generate N realizations
Run solver per sample
– Evaluate multiphysics core
– Parallel-ready workflow
Reliability outputs
– Variability envelopes
– Exceedance probability
– Worst-case configurations
Probabilistic tolerance propagation
Fig. 1: Block diagram of the proposed multiphysics–probabilistic framework. A deter-
ministic multiphysics core (property-field construction + coupled thermo-viscoelastic–
damage solver) is wrapped by a probabilistic tolerance propagation layer (Monte Carlo
sampling of geometric deviations) to produce both nominal predictions and reliability
metrics.
heterogeneous, with substantial total porosity distributed quasi-periodically through
the thickness as a result of the pass-by-pass deposition sequence [17, 27]. Table ?? sum-
marizes the baseline material families, indicative porosity levels, and the corresponding
sources.
Porosity is not represented by meshing individual pores. It is introduced through
an effective homogenized description: the porosity level associated with each base-
line material is incorporated into the effective properties assigned to the homogenized
subdomains, while the periodic modulation of Eq. (10) represents the prescribed
spatial variation of those effective properties through the coating thickness. This
treatment is consistent with the homogeneous multilayer representation used for func-
tionally graded coatings by Liu et al. [28]. Two consequences follow and are stated
as limitations in Section 6: pore-scale stress concentrations are not resolved, and the
thermal-barrier role of porosity does not enter the solution because the temperature
history is prescribed per subdomain rather than obtained from a heat-conduction
problem.
7


Table 1: Summary of key model parameters, numerical values, and uncertainty def-
initions (units and origin), covering functionally graded material modeling, damage
mechanics, and probabilistic reliability analysis [8, 14, 19, 22]. Every parameter is
listed with its numerical value, its origin, and its declared status. Benchmark denotes
a declared numerical choice for the generic verification case; identification required
denotes a quantity that a material-specific study would have to measure.
Group
Symbol
Meaning
Unit
Value
Origin / note
Geometry and discretization
Geometry
h
Total coating thickness
mm
2.0
Design input
Discretization
M
No. of through-thickness
homogenized subdomains
–
40
This study (adopted; verified
Sect. 4.1)
Time stepping
∆t
Time step
s
0.25
This study (adopted; verified
Sect. 4.1)
Time horizon
tfinal
Final simulation time
s
60
This study
Coordinate
z
Through-thickness coordinate mm
[0, 2]
z ∈[0, h] ; 0 interface, h free
surface
Depth
ζ
Normalized depth below free
surface
–
[0, 1]
ζ = (h −z)/h; used for all
results
Thermo-viscoelasticity (Prony / generalized Maxwell)
Viscoelasticity
E∞(T )
Long-term equilibrium
modulus
–
0.60 Ei(z, T )
Literature / calibration
(benchmark)
Viscoelasticity
Em(T )
m-th Prony modulus
coefficient
–
E1,2,3 =
0.20, 0.12, 0.08 Ei
Literature / calibration
(benchmark)
Viscoelasticity
τm
m-th relaxation time
(constant in T ; no shift
factor)
s
τ1,2,3 = 5, 50, 500
Literature / calibration ; ident.
required
Viscoelasticity
Mp
Number of Prony terms
–
3
Model choice
Temperature
T
Prescribed temperature field
◦C
20 →400 →20
Operating condition
(benchmark cycle, Fig. 3)
Reference
Tref
Stress-free reference
temperature
◦C
20
Benchmark
Thermal expansion (eigenstrain and coating–substrate mismatch)
Expansion
αc
Coating expansion coefficient
(uniform through the
thickness in the benchmark)
10−6/K 16
Benchmark; ident. required
Expansion
αs
Substrate expansion
coefficient
10−6/K 13
Benchmark; ident. required
Mismatch
∆α
αc −αs, drives Eq. (5)
10−6/K 3
Derived
Mismatch
∆Tmax
Tmax −Tref over the
benchmark cycle
K
380
Derived (Fig. 3a)
Mismatch
εmis
max
∆α ∆Tmax, peak mismatch
strain
10−3
1.14
Derived; plotted in Fig. 3b
Functionally graded material and modulation (AlSi–hBN reference family)
FGM
Emet(T )
Metallic-phase modulus
GPa
48 (20 ◦C); 31 (400 ◦C) Literature / material data ;
porosity-inclusive [27]
FGM
Ecer(T )
Ceramic-phase modulus
GPa
12 (20 ◦C); 8 (400 ◦C) Literature / material data ;
porosity-inclusive [27]
FGM
ng
Gradient exponent
–
2.0
Design choice / tuning
Modulation
∆Eg
Modulation amplitude
GPa
2.0 (≈4–17% of local
E)
Deposition heterogeneity [17];
nanoindentation
Modulation
λg
Modulation wavelength
mm
0.4
Microstructure assumption ;
pass-group (Sect. 3.6)
Porosity
ϕ
Total porosity (homogenized) %
30–45
Embedded in effective
moduli [28]
Damage model
Damage
D
Scalar damage variable
(0 ≤D ≤1)
–
[0, 1]
Model state
Damage
σcrit
Critical stress threshold
MPa
80
Literature / calibration ;
effective value (Sect. 3.5)
Damage
A
Damage rate coefficient
s−1
0.12
Literature / calibration ;
anchored on [3], 300 ◦C
Damage
md
Damage exponent (overstress) –
2.1
Literature / calibration ;
anchored on [3]
Damage
nd
Damage exponent
(saturation)
–
3.2
Literature / calibration ;
anchored on [3]
Screening metric
Dcrit
Damage classification level
–
0.10
This study ; declared level, not
a rupture criterion (Sect. 5.2)
Prescribed mechanical excitation
Excitation
εapp
0
Applied normal-strain
amplitude (compressive)
10−3
2.11
Benchmark input, not a contact
solution
Excitation
np
Number of approach pulses
per cycle
–
2
Benchmark waveform
(Sect. 3.1.3)
Excitation
tr
Pulse ramp time
s
2
Benchmark waveform
(Sect. 3.1.3)
Excitation
td
Pulse hold (plateau) time
s
4
Benchmark waveform
(Sect. 3.1.3)
Probabilistic tolerance analysis (Monte Carlo)
Tolerances
δu
Vector of geometric deviations mm
—
Manufacturing / assembly
specifications
Uncertainty
δuj ∼
N (0, σ2
uj )
Example tolerance
distribution
mm
σuj = 0.02
Modeling assumption ;
±3σ = ±0.06 mm band
Tolerance map
Leff
Effective compliance length
of Eq. (14)
mm
75
Reduced-order model input;
benchmark
Monte Carlo
N
Number of realizations
–
800
This study (nested convergence,
Sect. 4.4)
Surrogate
p
Polynomial response-surface
order
–
3
400 + 400 runs (Fig. 8)
Outputs
σmax
Maximum stress statistic
MPa
—
Post-processing metric
Outputs
Pe
Probability of exceeding Dcrit
–
—
Post-processing metric
8


Table 2: Model scope. Excluded quantities appear nowhere in the results, figures
or conclusions of this paper.
Quantity / phenomenon
Present
in
physical
sys-
tem
Solved
here?
Representation in the solver
Normal approach / interference
Yes
No
Converted to prescribed εapp(t)
(input)
Contact pressure pn(z, t)
Yes
No
Not computed; enters via the
input history
Tangential traction qt(z, t)
Yes
No
Not resolved; excluded
Coulomb friction coefficient µ
Yes
No
Absent from the formulation
Frictional heat generation
Yes
No
Effect only via prescribed T (z, t)
Material removal / wear depth
Yes
No
Not solved; not reported
Rotor dynamics, leakage flow
Yes
No
Outside the reduced domain
Individually
resolved
pores,
splats, cracks
Yes
No
Homogenized
effective
proper-
ties only
Temperature history T (z, t)
—
Input
Prescribed benchmark
Normal-strain history εapp(t)
—
Input
Prescribed benchmark
Thermal
eigenstrain,
expansion
mismatch
—
Solved
Eqs. (4)–(5)
Viscoelastic stress σ(z, t)
—
Solved
Computed output
Scalar damage D(z, t)
—
Solved
Computed output
Exceedance probability Pe
—
Solved
Monte Carlo output
3.1.2 Physical system versus solved numerical domain
Fig. 2 distinguishes two levels that must be kept separate. Panel (a) is the physical
system: sealing teeth carried on one member face the coated counter-face across a
nominal running clearance, and relative radial motion may close that clearance and
create a localized rubbing region. Normal pressure, tangential traction and frictional
heat are genuine physical quantities at that level. Panel (b) is the solved domain: a
local through-thickness coating column of total thickness h, divided into M perfectly
bonded homogenized subdomains, resting on a substrate that enters the formulation
only as a kinematic thermal-expansion constraint through the mismatch of Eq. (5);
no substrate modulus, thickness or force balance is solved.
The subdomain boundaries are continuity conditions, not sliding interfaces: dis-
placement and traction continuity is enforced through the thickness, so the concern
that friction between internal layers would violate continuity does not arise, because
no such interface exists. The discretization is therefore defined by the number M of
homogenized subdomains and by the time step ∆t, not by a two- or three-dimensional
finite-element contact mesh; no contact elements, gap-closure algorithm or friction law
are present in the solver. Table 2 lists, quantity by quantity, what is physically present,
what is prescribed as an input, what is computed, and what is excluded.
3.1.3 Prescribed loading histories
Two prescribed histories drive the column, both illustrated in Fig. 3:
The thermal history is a trapezoidal benchmark cycle: heating from T0 = 20 ◦C to
Tmax = 400 ◦C over 0 ≤t ≤20 s, an isothermal dwell at 400 ◦C for 20 ≤t ≤40 s,
9


and cooling back to 20 ◦C for 40 ≤t ≤60 s. The stress-free reference temperature
is Tref = 20 ◦C. Within each subdomain the temperature is uniform at each instant.
This cycle is a reproducible numerical benchmark chosen to exercise the full range of
viscoelastic relaxation and thermal mismatch; it is not an engine duty cycle, and no
claim of duty-cycle representativeness is made.
The mechanical history is an equivalent normal-strain history εapp(t) applied at the
coating boundary, representing the normal approach of the sealing member in a cyclic
manner synchronized with the thermal dwell. It is an input, not a contact solution: the
conversion from physical interference to equivalent prescribed strain is an assumption
of the reduced-order model, and the amplitude εapp
0
is a declared benchmark quantity
(Table 1). Its basis is stated explicitly rather than left implicit. The value 2.11 × 10−3
was selected so that the peak equivalent stress generated by the benchmark falls
within the stress range over which the damage parameters of Section 4.3 are identified;
below roughly 1.6 × 10−3 the column never reaches σcrit and no damage is produced
at all, which would leave the damage model unexercised. The resulting stress level is
therefore a designed property of the benchmark and is not presented as an independent
prediction.
The waveform is stated here in full so that it can be reproduced without access
to the driver script. It consists of np = 2 identical trapezoidal compressive pulses
placed inside the isothermal dwell, each built from a linear ramp of duration tr = 2 s,
a plateau of duration td = 4 s at the amplitude −εapp
0
, and a linear return ramp of
duration tr:
εapp(t) = −εapp
0
np
X
k=1
Λ
t −tk
tr
, td
tr

,
εapp
0
= 2.11 × 10−3,
t1 = 18 s, t2 = 30 s,
(1)
where Λ denotes the unit trapezoid that rises linearly from 0 to 1 on [0, 1], remains
at 1 on [1, 1 + td/tr] and returns linearly to 0 on [1 + td/tr, 2 + td/tr]. The strain is
therefore zero for t < 18 s and for t > 38 s, and the two plateaux occupy 20 ≤t ≤24 s
and 32 ≤t ≤36 s. The sign convention is that compression is negative, consistent
with a normal approach of the sealing member.
A third strain contribution is generated internally rather than prescribed, and is
therefore not one of the two input histories above. Because the coating is bonded
to a substrate of different thermal expansion coefficient, the constraint produces an
expansion-mismatch strain governed by the difference ∆α = αc −αs, formally defined
in Eq. (5) below. Anticipating that definition, and noting that αc is uniform through
the thickness in the benchmark so that εmis is a function of time only, its peak value
over the cycle is
εmis
max = ∆α ∆Tmax = (16 −13) × 10−6 K−1 × (400 −20) K = 1.14 × 10−3,
(2)
which is the plateau of the dashed curve in Fig. 3b. The applied-strain amplitude and
the peak mismatch strain are therefore of the same order, εapp
0
/εmis
max = 1.85, so neither
contribution dominates the mechanical strain of Eq. (6). Both histories are plotted in
Fig. 3b.
10


Fig. 2: Separation of the physical system from the solved numerical domain. (a) In
the physical labyrinth-seal stage, relative radial approach may close the clearance
c0 and create a localized rub region in which contact pressure, tangential traction
and frictional heating are real phenomena. (b) The domain actually solved is a local
through-thickness coating column of M perfectly bonded homogenized subdomains
on a substrate that enters only through the thermal expansion mismatch, driven by
a prescribed equivalent normal-strain history εapp(t) and a prescribed temperature
history T(z, t).
The through-thickness coordinate is measured from the coating–substrate inter-
face, z = 0, to the free surface, z = h, so that the metallic-rich end of the gradient
lies at z = 0 and the compliant, ceramic/dislocator-rich end lies at the free surface,
consistently with Eq. (10). Results are reported against the normalized depth below
the free surface, ζ = (h −z)/h ∈[0, 1], so that ζ = 0 is the free surface and ζ = 1 the
interface. Subdomains are indexed i = 1, . . . , M from the free surface inwards.
3.2 Modeling assumptions
The abradable coating is modeled as a layered, functionally graded medium sub-
jected to thermo-mechanical loading representative of turbine labyrinth seal operation.
Within the temperature range considered (20–400 ◦C, Section 3.1.3), the material
response is assumed to be predominantly thermo-viscoelastic. Progressive material
degradation is described using a scalar isotropic damage variable, while irreversible
viscoplastic effects are neglected.
Thermal expansion is retained explicitly. The total strain is decomposed into a
mechanical part and a thermal eigenstrain, and the coating–substrate expansion mis-
match is included explicitly (Section 3.4), so that thermal stress is generated by the
model rather than prescribed. In the benchmark parameter set the coating expansion
coefficient is taken as uniform through the thickness, αc(z, T) ≡αc = 16 × 10−6 K−1,
so that the mismatch strain of Eq. (5) is a function of time alone; the general formu-
lation retains the depth and temperature dependence αc(z, T) and admits a graded
11


Fig. 3: Prescribed loading benchmark. (a) The trapezoidal thermal cycle runs 20 →
400 →20 ◦C over 60 s with a 20-s dwell, and the stress-free reference temperature is
Tref = 20 ◦C. (b) The equivalent normal-strain history εapp(t) is an input representing
cyclic normal approach, whereas the coating–substrate expansion mismatch strain
εmis is generated internally by the thermal eigenstrain of Eqs. (4)–(5). The applied
waveform is the two-pulse trapezoid of Eq. (1) with amplitude εapp
0
= 2.11 × 10−3,
ramp time tr = 2 s and plateau td = 4 s; the mismatch plateau is ∆α ∆Tmax =
3 × 10−6 K−1 × 380 K = 1.14 × 10−3, i.e. exactly the value implied by the coefficients
αc = 16 × 10−6 K−1 and αs = 13 × 10−6 K−1 of Table 1. The cycle is a reproducible
verification benchmark, not an engine duty cycle.
coefficient without any change to the solution algorithm. The expansion coefficients
are declared benchmark quantities requiring material identification (Table 1).
The functional gradient varies continuously through the coating thickness and
incorporates a periodic modulation to represent deposition-induced microstructural
heterogeneity. Thermal loading is prescribed and assumed uniform within each homog-
enized subdomain. Manufacturing and assembly tolerances are treated separately
within a probabilistic framework. Fig. 4 shows how the statistical content of the prob-
lem is transformed along the computational pipeline. A symmetric Gaussian tolerance
input (panel a) perturbs the amplitude of the prescribed equivalent strain through
Eq. (14), giving the ensemble of loading histories of panel c, while the deterministic
through-thickness property field of panel b is identical in every realization. The per-
turbed histories are propagated through the coupled solver to give a family of damage
trajectories (panel d) and post-processed into the end-of-cycle damage distribution
(panel e). The transformation is not measure-preserving: the symmetric geometric
input produces an asymmetric damage output whose exceedance probability beyond
Dcrit is precisely the quantity that a deterministic analysis at nominal geometry cannot
reproduce.
3.3 Model parameter summary and uncertainty definition
Table 1 summarizes the mechanical, thermal, numerical, and probabilistic inputs used
in the deterministic and Monte Carlo analyses, including units, numerical values,
12


Fig. 4: Propagation of variability along the computational pipeline. (a) The sampled
geometric tolerance is a symmetric Gaussian, δuj ∼N(0, σ2
u) with σu = 0.02 mm and
a ±3σu band. (b) The deterministic monotonic and periodically modulated property
fields of Eq. (10) (wavelength λg); these are identical in every realization and are not
randomized in the present uncertainty model. (c) The ensemble of perturbed equivalent
loading histories obtained from the tolerance input through Eq. (14), which is the only
randomized quantity. (d) The coupled solver returns a family of damage trajectories,
the modulated mean lying systematically above the monotonic mean and reaching
0.03376 at t = 60 s against 0.02135 for the monotonic case. (e) The end-of-cycle damage
distribution is asymmetric, with the shaded tail beyond the declared classification
level Dcrit = 0.10 giving the exceedance probability Pe = 0.076, against 0.035 for the
monotonic gradient at the same level. A symmetric geometric input therefore maps into
an asymmetric damage output. Because the mapping is not measure-preserving, the
ensemble mean 0.034 is not itself the nominal-geometry response; what a deterministic
analysis at nominal geometry cannot deliver is the exceedance mass beyond Dcrit,
which is a property of the distribution and not of any single realization.
origin, and declared status. The selection of parameters is consistent with the litera-
ture on functionally graded materials, continuum damage mechanics, and structural
reliability analysis [8, 14, 19, 22].
3.4 Thermo-viscoelastic formulation with thermal eigenstrain
The thermo-viscoelastic behavior of the coating is described using a linear formula-
tion based on a Prony series representation of the relaxation modulus [5, 6, 12]. The
temperature-dependent relaxation modulus is expressed as [7, 12]
E(t, T) = E∞(T) +
Mp
X
m=1
Em(T) exp

−t
τm

,
(3)
where E∞(T) denotes the long-term elastic modulus, Em(T) are the Prony coef-
ficients, and τm are the relaxation times. Equation (3) is the classical generalized
Maxwell (Prony) representation of linear viscoelasticity and is not derived here. Its
non-isothermal implementation is stated explicitly, because the benchmark spans
13


20–400 ◦C and the constitutive response cannot otherwise be reproduced. The temper-
ature enters through the instantaneous modulus only: the phase moduli Emet and Ecer
of Table 1 are interpolated linearly in T between their 20 and 400 ◦C values, Ei(z, T)
follows from Eq. (10), and the Prony weights are constant fractions of Ei(z, T), namely
E∞= 0.60 Ei and E1,2,3 = 0.20, 0.12, 0.08 Ei. The relaxation times are held constant
at τ1,2,3 = 5, 50, 500 s; no time–temperature shift factor of WLF or Arrhenius type is
applied, so the model is not thermorheologically simple and no master curve is con-
structed. The hereditary integral is advanced by the standard recursive update of the
internal variables, q n+1
m
= e−∆t/τmq n
m + Em(T n+1) τm
 1 −e−∆t/τm
∆εmech/∆t, with
the moduli evaluated at the temperature of the current step, which is exact for a strain
varying linearly within the step at constant temperature and first-order accurate in
the temperature variation across it. Introducing a shift factor identified from dynamic
mechanical analysis is a defined refinement, listed in Section 6.
Because the coating is heated while bonded to a substrate, the total strain is
decomposed into a mechanical (stress-producing) part and a thermal eigenstrain,
εtot(z, t) = εmech(z, t) + εth(z, t),
εth(z, t) = αc(z, T)

T(z, t) −Tref

,
(4)
and the constraint exerted by the substrate introduces an expansion mismatch strain
εmis(z, t) =

αc(z, T) −αs(T)
 
T(z, t) −Tref

,
(5)
so that the mechanical strain driving the constitutive response is
εmech(z, t) = εapp(t) −εmis(z, t).
(6)
Equations (4)–(6) are the standard thermo-elastic strain decomposition applied to a
constrained coating layer [7, 28]. One consequence of the reduced-order form should be
stated plainly, because it bounds how the results may be read: the prescribed normal
approach and the coating–substrate expansion mismatch are combined into a single
equivalent stress-producing strain. In a full continuum treatment these are tensorially
distinct, the former being a through-thickness compression and the latter an in-plane
biaxial mismatch stress. The present formulation does not resolve that distinction, and
it is therefore an equivalent one-dimensional surrogate for the constrained response
rather than a complete thermoelastic constraint model. With αc = αs and εapp = 0
the formulation reduces to stress-free expansion, which is used as a closed-form unit
test in Section 4.1.
The viscoelastic stress response is obtained through the Boltzmann superposition
(hereditary) integral of the relaxation modulus with the mechanical strain-rate history
[5, 11],
σ(z, t) =
Z t
0
E
 t −ξ, T
 dεmech(z, ξ)
dξ
dξ.
(7)
This formulation captures the memory effects and delayed stress response under tran-
sient thermo-mechanical loading and provides the basis for coupling with damage
evolution.
14


3.5 Progressive damage model
Material degradation is represented by a scalar damage variable D(t) ∈[0, 1], account-
ing for stiffness reduction due to micro-cracking and matrix degradation [8, 9].
Although damage may be anisotropic at the microscale, a scalar formulation is adopted
to ensure numerical robustness and computational efficiency at the coating scale.
The validity of this coating-scale scalar description rests on a separation-of-scales
(representative elementary volume, REV) argument, which is made explicit here for
the heterogeneous graded system considered [29]. Three characteristic lengths must
be ordered: the microstructural feature size ℓµ (splats, pores, dislocator particles;
ℓµ ≈5–30 µm for as-sprayed material [27]), the subdomain thickness h/M = 50 µm
used in the adopted discretization, and the modulation wavelength λg = 0.4 mm. The
adopted configuration satisfies ℓµ ≲h/M < λg ≪h, while the modulation wavelength
is resolved by eight subdomains per period so that the macroscopic property oscilla-
tion is not aliased by the homogenization. The margin in the first inequality should be
stated honestly rather than overclaimed: h/M = 50 µm exceeds the coarse end of the
feature range (30 µm) by a factor of only 1.7, and the fine end (5 µm) by a factor of 10.
A subdomain is therefore not a deterministic REV in the classical sense of containing
an arbitrarily large feature population. The two roles must therefore be kept apart.
The effective properties assigned to each subdomain are assumed to have been homog-
enized over an underlying representative volume of the sprayed microstructure, in the
statistical sense of Kanit et al. [29]; h/M is a numerical discretization length whose
function is to resolve the macroscopic modulation, and it is not itself evidence that
such a volume has been sampled. The N realizations of Section 4.4 sample geometric
tolerances only and quantify no microstructural apparent-property variance. Estab-
lishing REV convergence for a specific coating, by the ensemble criterion of [29] applied
to measured microstructures, is a separate material-identification task and is listed
as such in Section 6. The scalar variable is therefore defined at the REV/subdomain
scale, where the randomly oriented splat and pore population justifies quasi-isotropy
of the degradation, and it is used only for macroscopic stiffness degradation; it is not
claimed to represent sub-REV anisotropic crack populations and is not used to predict
crack paths. Should the subdomain thickness approach the microstructural feature
size, the REV assumption would degrade and an anisotropic or nonlocal description
would be required; this boundary of validity is stated in Section 6.
Damage evolution is governed by a stress-driven kinetic law of the Kachanov–
Lemaitre type [8, 9],
dD
dt = A
σeq(z, t)
σcrit
−1
md
(1 −D)nd,
(8)
where A, md, and nd are material parameters, σcrit is a critical stress threshold, and
⟨·⟩denotes the Macaulay bracket. The sign convention is fixed here and used without
exception. Compression is negative. With αc > αs and heating, Eq. (5) gives εmis > 0,
so Eq. (6) makes the mismatch term add to the prescribed compressive approach rather
than oppose it: both contributions drive εmech negative, and the constitutive stress of
Eq. (7) is compressive throughout the loaded phase of the benchmark. A small positive
15


excursion of a few MPa occurs during unloading, as viscoelastic recovery returns the
column through zero, and it remains far below σcrit so that it never activates Eq. (8).
Two distinct measures are therefore used and are kept distinct throughout: the signed
constitutive stress σ(z, t) of Eq. (7), and the non-negative equivalent stress
σeq(z, t) ≡|σ(z, t)|,
σmax(z) ≡max
t
σeq(z, t),
(9)
which drives Eq. (8) and carries every stress statistic reported in Section 5. The
same convention is implemented in the solver and used in all figures. Damage accu-
mulates progressively when the local stress exceeds the critical value and saturates
as D approaches unity, allowing the model to capture nonlinear degradation under
cyclic thermo-mechanical loading. Equation (8) is explicitly phenomenological: it
describes macroscopic stiffness loss and is not a mechanistic representation of indi-
vidual microstructural damage processes. One structural difference from the classical
creep-rupture form of the Kachanov–Lemaitre family should be stated explicitly,
because it changes the qualitative behaviour of the solution. The classical form car-
ries the damage factor with a negative exponent, (1 −D)−k, which accelerates as
D grows and produces a finite rupture time. Equation (8) carries it with a positive
exponent nd > 0, so the rate decreases monotonically with accumulated damage and
D →1 only asymptotically: the law is saturating rather than rupture-generating. This
is a deliberate choice for a stiffness-degradation descriptor at the coating scale, where
the quantity of interest is the loss of load-carrying capacity within a bounded cycle
rather than a rupture time. It has two consequences that are used throughout: Dcrit
is a declared classification level and not a rupture criterion, and the identified expo-
nents are not directly comparable with exponents tabulated for the negative-exponent
creep-rupture form.
A single value of the critical threshold, σcrit = 80 MPa, is used through the coating
thickness even though the modulus is graded and modulated. This is a consequence of
the effective-homogenized-continuum assumption adopted in Section 3.1.1: the mod-
ulated FGM microstructure is not resolved at the scale of individual pores or phases,
and its influence is represented through the spatial variation of the effective proper-
ties. The threshold therefore corresponds to the macroscopic onset of damage in the
homogenized medium rather than to the local initiation threshold of each constituent.
Two consequences follow. First, because the stress field, and not the threshold, carries
the spatial heterogeneity, the predicted hot-spot locations are governed by the stress
concentrations induced by modulation, which is precisely the mechanism under investi-
gation. Second, this approximation is appropriate for the global structural response but
not for resolving local microstructural damage initiation: a spatially varying threshold
σcrit(z, T, ϕ), informed by the local porosity and temperature, would be required for
that purpose and is identified as a model extension in Section 6.
3.6 Functionally graded material with periodic
microstructural modulation
The spatial variation of the elastic modulus through the coating thickness is defined to
reduce global stress discontinuities while accounting for local heterogeneities induced
16


by the deposition process. The effective modulus in subdomain i at position z is
expressed as
Ei(z, T) = Emet(T) +

Ecer(T) −Emet(T)
 z
h
ng
+ ∆Eg sin
2πz
λg

,
(10)
where Emet(T) and Ecer(T) are the temperature-dependent effective moduli of the
metallic-rich and dislocator-rich ends, respectively. The coordinate z denotes the
through-thickness position, h is the total coating thickness, ng is the functional gra-
dient exponent, ∆Eg is the amplitude of the sinusoidal modulation, and λg is the
characteristic wavelength of the microstructural heterogeneity. The modulation ampli-
tude is denoted ∆Eg (units of GPa) and must not be confused with the strain measures
εapp, εth, εmis and εmech of Section 3.4.
This representation enables simultaneous modeling of the global functional gradi-
ent and local stiffness fluctuations, which are responsible for stress localization and
premature damage initiation [19, 20].
The sinusoidal term in Eq. (10) has a direct manufacturing origin. Thermal-spray
deposition builds the coating pass by pass: each torch raster deposits a band of splats,
and the periodic alternation of freshly deposited, well-melted material with inter-pass
boundaries, oxide stringers, and locally elevated porosity produces a quasi-periodic
through-thickness oscillation of density and stiffness [16, 17]. The wavelength λg there-
fore corresponds to the thickness deposited per raster group (here λg = 0.4 mm, i.e.,
groups of passes of roughly 10–50 µm each), and the amplitude ∆Eg quantifies the
resulting stiffness contrast. Both parameters are experimentally measurable: λg can
be extracted from image analysis of polished cross-sections through the periodicity
of porosity and oxide banding, while ∆Eg can be identified from through-thickness
nanoindentation modulus profiles or spatially resolved ultrasonic measurements; the
Prony parameters follow from stress-relaxation or dynamic mechanical analysis at the
temperatures of interest [12], and the expansion coefficients from dilatometry. In the
present study ∆Eg and λg are adopted as declared benchmark values (Table 1); a
dedicated experimental identification campaign is part of the validation pathway of
Section 6. The idealization of the modulation as a single harmonic retains the dominant
Fourier component of the measured banding, and higher harmonics can be superposed
without any change to the solution algorithm.
3.7 Coupling between viscoelasticity, damage, and grading
The coupling between thermo-viscoelasticity, damage evolution, and functional grad-
ing is achieved by introducing the damage variable as a stiffness-degradation factor
in the constitutive response, following the strain-equivalence principle of continuum
damage mechanics [8, 9],
Eeff(z, T, t) =
 1 −D(z, t)

Ei(z, T).
(11)
17


This coupling allows the progressive reduction of stiffness to influence stress redistri-
bution and damage accumulation during loading, providing a consistent framework
for predicting localized degradation in graded abradable coatings.
4 Numerical Methodology and Verification
4.1 Spatial and temporal discretization and refinement studies
The spatial discretization is one-dimensional through the thickness: the coating col-
umn is partitioned into M homogenized subdomains, each treated as a stratum with
piecewise-constant properties. This is formally equivalent to a mesh of M linear one-
dimensional elements of size h/M with a single integration point per element. No two-
or three-dimensional finite-element mesh is employed and no contact elements exist, so
element type and total mesh count in the usual finite-element sense do not apply; the
resolution of the model is defined entirely by M and ∆t. This subdomain-based semi-
analytical discretization is adopted deliberately because it makes an N-realization
Monte Carlo loop computationally tractable while resolving the through-thickness
gradients that dominate this configuration.
Both resolutions are established quantitatively against finer declared references
rather than asserted. The spatial series M = 10, 20, 40, 80 is compared with the refer-
ence M = 160, and the temporal series ∆t = 1.0, 0.5, 0.25, 0.125 s with the reference
∆t = 0.0625 s. The adopted values are M = 40, for which the relative errors are 0.36%
in maximum stress and 4.71% in maximum damage, and ∆t = 0.25 s, for which the
relative errors are 0.05% and 0.56% respectively. These figures are collected in Table 3
and plotted in Fig. 5. The observed behaviour is consistent with the formulation: spa-
tial convergence is close to second order, while temporal convergence is first order,
as expected from the explicit damage update of Eq. (12). The refinement series is
reported as computed. Below eight subdomains per modulation wavelength the sinu-
soidal term of Eq. (10) is aliased, so the spatial error is not a monotone function of
M in that range; from M = 20 upwards it decreases by a factor of 4.4 and then
5.6 per refinement level, consistent with second-order behaviour, and the temporal
error decreases monotonically over the whole series. What the study establishes is the
adopted-point accuracy: at ∆t = 1 s the error in maximum damage is 12.7%, which
is why that step was refined, whereas at the adopted ∆t = 0.25 s it is 0.56%. The
spatial resolution is not selected by refinement alone, and we state the reason because
it is the reverse of the usual argument. Refining M reduces the discretization error
monotonically above the aliasing range, but it also shrinks the subdomain thickness
h/M, which must remain at or above the microstructural feature size for the homog-
enized description of Section 3.5 to hold. At M = 40, h/M = 50 µm sits just above
the coarse end of that range, whereas M = 80 would give h/M = 25 µm and place the
numerical cell below it. M = 40 is therefore adopted as the finest resolution compati-
ble with the homogenization assumption, and the residual errors it carries relative to
the M = 160 reference, 0.36% in σmax and 4.71% in Dmax, are reported directly rather
than described as converged. The adopted step also samples the fastest retained relax-
ation mode adequately, since ∆t = τ1/20 with τ1 = 5 s, and the recursive convolution
update is exact for piecewise-linear strain within each step.
18


Table 3: Spatial and temporal refinement of the reduced-order through-thickness
solver.
Refinement item
Series
Reference
Adopted
Relative
error
Spatial
discretization
M
10, 20, 40, 80
160
40
σmax: 0.36%
Dmax: 4.71%
Time increment ∆t (s)
1.0, 0.5, 0.25, 0.125
0.0625
0.25
σmax: 0.05%
Dmax: 0.56%
Table 4: Closed-form unit tests used to verify the implementation.
Test
Configuration
Analytical reference
Agreement
Relaxation kernel
Step strain, isothermal, D ≡0
Eq. (3) evaluated directly
< 10−10
Free
thermal
expan-
sion
αc = αs, εapp = 0
Zero stress at all times
< 10−12
Constrained mismatch
∆α̸ = 0, elastic limit (τm →∞)
σ = −E ∆α ∆T
< 10−8
Damage kinetics
Constant overstress, nd = 0
Analytical
integration
of
Eq. (8)
< 10−6
Four closed-form unit tests are used to verify the implementation independently of
any refinement argument, and are summarized in Table 4. They isolate, in turn, the
viscoelastic kernel, the free thermal eigenstrain, the constrained expansion mismatch,
and the damage kinetics. All four agree with the analytical solution to within the
tolerances listed. It is emphasized that these are verification tests, establishing that
the code solves the intended equations; they establish nothing about whether those
equations describe a particular real coating.
4.2 Incremental solution algorithm
The governing equations are solved using an explicit incremental time-integration
scheme. At each time step tk, the mechanical response and damage state are updated
sequentially for each subdomain. The full loop is summarized in Fig. 7 and the
corresponding pseudocode is given in Fig. 6.
Initialization:
The damage field is initialized as Di(t0) = 0 for all subdomains. Initial temperature,
boundary conditions, and material parameters are prescribed.
Update of local viscoelastic properties:
For each subdomain i, the graded and periodically modulated elastic modulus Ei(z, T)
is updated according to the local temperature and through-thickness position. The
stiffness degradation induced by damage is applied through the effective modulus
Eeff,i(tk) = (1 −Di(tk−1)) Ei(z, T).
19


Fig. 5: Quantitative spatial and temporal refinement of the reduced-order solver.
(a) Spatial convergence against the M = 160 reference is close to second order; the
adopted M = 40 (circled) gives 0.36% error in maximum stress and 4.71% in maximum
damage. (b) Temporal convergence against the ∆t = 0.0625 s reference is first order,
as expected from the explicit damage update; the adopted ∆t = 0.25 s (circled)
gives 0.05% and 0.56% respectively. The shaded band in (a) marks resolutions below
eight subdomains per modulation wavelength, where the sinusoidal term of Eq. (10)
is aliased and the error is not a monotone function of M.
Strain decomposition:
The thermal eigenstrain and the expansion-mismatch strain are evaluated from the
current temperature through Eqs. (4)–(5), and subtracted from the applied history to
give the mechanical strain increment of Eq. (6).
Stress computation:
The viscoelastic stress σi(tk) is evaluated using a recursive convolution algorithm
based on the Prony-series formulation and the mechanical strain history.
Damage update:
The damage variable is updated explicitly using the discretized kinetic law
Di(tk) = Di(tk−1) + A
σeq,i(tk)
σcrit
−1
md  1 −Di(tk−1)
nd∆t,
(12)
with the constraint 0 ≤Di ≤1 enforced to preserve physical admissibility.
Time advancement:
The simulation proceeds to the next time step until the end of the prescribed loading
history.
This explicit incremental strategy provides a robust and computationally efficient
solution framework, particularly well suited for large ensembles of simulations required
by the probabilistic analysis.
20


# Initialization
for i in range(1, M+1):
# M = number of subdomains
D[i][0] = 0
# zero initial damage
t = delta t; k = 1
# index 0 holds the initial condition
# Time loop
while t <= t final:
# Update local property for each subdomain
for i in range(1, M+1):
E[i][k] = UpdateElasticModulus(z=z i, T=T(i,t))
# Thermal eigenstrain and mismatch (Eqs. 4-5)
for i in range(1, M+1):
eps mech[i][k] = ApplStrain(t) - Mismatch(i, T(i,t))
# Viscoelastic recursive convolution
for i in range(1, M+1):
sigma[i][k] = ComputeViscoelasticStress(E, eps mech, k, i)
# Damage update
for i in range(1, M+1):
sigma eq[i][k] = abs(sigma[i][k])
rate = DamageRate(sigma eq[i][k], D[i][k-1])
D[i][k] = min(D[i][k-1] + rate * delta t, 1.0)
t = t + delta t; k = k + 1
Fig. 6: Iterative algorithm pseudocode for the incremental thermo-viscoelastic–
damage solver.
4.3 Calibration of damage parameters
The damage law of Eq. (8) is phenomenological: the scalar variable D is an effective
stiffness-loss measure, not a physical representation of the underlying microstructural
crack population. The calibration described below identifies an effective parameter set
that reproduces macroscopic degradation observables; it does not establish a complete
microstructure-to-damage link.
The reference dataset is the experimental study of Bertuol on thermally sprayed
AlSi-based abradable coatings [3], whose elevated-temperature assessments were
conducted at 300 ◦C. That work is retained as the experimental anchor for the
temperature-dependent response and abradability trends of this coating family: it con-
strains the expected tendency of the response within the experimentally documented
range and prevents the damage parameters from being selected without physical guid-
ance. The target observable taken from the reported stiffness-degradation histories is
a normalized stiffness loss of D = 0.45 after 60 s. With σcrit = 80 MPa fixed from
the onset of measurable degradation in the same dataset, the triplet (A, md, nd) is
identified by least-squares minimization of the misfit against that degradation curve,
yielding A = 0.12 s−1, md = 2.1 and nd = 3.2. The constant equivalent stress that
reproduces the same target under the identified parameter set follows by inverting
Eq. (13) and is 115 MPa. We state explicitly what this number is and is not: it is an
internal-consistency benchmark derived from the identified parameters, not an inde-
pendently measured stress extracted from the reference dataset, and it is used only so
that the calibration can be checked in closed form by the reader. The identified expo-
nents are effective values for the saturating form of Eq. (8) and are reported as such;
because that form carries the damage factor with a positive exponent, they are not
21


Start
Parameter initialization
Set Di(t0) = 0 for all subdomains
t < tfinal?
Update Ei(tk) (from T and position)
Strain split: Eqs. (4)–(6)
Compute σi(tk) (recursive convolution)
Update Di(tk) (Eq. (12))
Advance time and index
End
Yes
No
Fig. 7: Schematic flow diagram describing the iterative resolution algorithm.
directly comparable with exponents tabulated for the negative-exponent creep-rupture
laws of the same family [8].
The calibrated set is internally consistent, and this has been verified analytically
rather than asserted. For a constant overstress the damage law of Eq. (8) integrates
in closed form to
D(t) = 1 −
h
1 + (nd −1) A

σeq/σcrit −1
md t
i−1/(nd−1)
.
(13)
Substituting σeq = 115 MPa, σcrit = 80 MPa, A = 0.12 s−1, md = 2.1, nd = 3.2
and t = 60 s gives an overstress of 0.4375, a damage rate of 2.116 × 10−2 s−1 and
D(60) = 0.454, which reproduces the calibration target D = 0.45 to within 1%.
Equation (13) is also the reference solution of the damage-kinetics unit test of Table 4.
The distinction between the experimentally informed range and the range explored
by the benchmark is now stated explicitly. The response up to 300 ◦C is experimentally
informed by the reference dataset. The extension of the benchmark cycle to 400 ◦C is a
constitutive model-based extrapolation: the temperature dependence over that inter-
val is carried by the thermo-viscoelastic side of the model through E∞(T), Em(T) and
22


τm, while the damage-kinetics parameters (A, md, nd, σcrit) are assumed temperature-
independent. The 400 ◦C case is therefore evaluated as a severe numerical benchmark
and is not claimed to reproduce the reference protocol or to constitute experimental
validation at that temperature. Because thermally activated mechanisms could accel-
erate damage kinetics, the predictions at the dwell temperature may underestimate
degradation and should be interpreted as model-based extrapolations rather than val-
idated quantitative predictions. A sensitivity analysis in which A was perturbed by
±20% changed the end-of-cycle damage at the calibration point by less than 10%
(+7.3% for A = 0.144 s−1 and −9.0% for A = 0.096 s−1, evaluated exactly with
Eq. (13)). Because A enters Eq. (13) monotonically, such a perturbation reorders no
realization, so the ranking of the ensemble is invariant by construction and is not itself
evidence of robustness; the quantity that does move is the exceedance probability,
since the fraction of realizations above the fixed level Dcrit shifts with the whole distri-
bution. That probability was therefore recomputed over the full ensemble under both
perturbations: it moves from Pe = 0.076 at the nominal A to 0.101 at A = 0.144 s−1
and 0.056 at A = 0.096 s−1. This calibration-sensitivity range is reported separately
from, and must not be confused with, the sampling interval of Section 4.4, which quan-
tifies Monte Carlo error at fixed A. Dedicated cyclic tests at 400 ◦C would be required
for material-specific validation and are identified as a priority of the experimental
programme.
4.4 Probabilistic framework and surrogate cross-check
Manufacturing and assembly tolerances are modeled as statistically independent Gaus-
sian random variables centered on nominal geometric dimensions. These uncertainties
are propagated through the numerical model using Monte Carlo simulations. The sam-
pled quantities are the manufacturing- and assembly-related geometric deviations only,
δuj ∼N(0, σ2
uj) with σuj = 0.02 mm. The subdomain moduli and relaxation times
are not sampled independently: they remain deterministic functions Ei(z, T) and τm.
The propagation chain is therefore δu →εmech →σ →D →statistics.
The first link of that chain is stated explicitly. The random vector is δu =
(δu1, δu2, δu3), whose three components are the coating-surface radial-position devi-
ation arising from the manufacturing thickness tolerance, the counter-face radial-
position deviation and the assembly concentricity deviation. The first component
contributes to closure of the running clearance but does not modify the coating thick-
ness h used in the constitutive property field of Eq. (10), which is held at its nominal
value in every realization together with the subdomain coordinates and the modula-
tion profile. They are modelled as independent, zero-mean and identically distributed,
δuj ∼N(0, σ2
u) with σu = 0.02 mm, and they enter with equal weight because each
contributes directly and additively to the closure of the running clearance. Their sum
perturbs the amplitude of the prescribed approach of Eq. (1) through an effective
compliance length Leff,
εapp
0
(δu) = εapp
0
+
1
Leff
X
j
δuj,
δuj ∼N(0, σ2
uj),
(14)
23


so that a symmetric geometric input enters the solver as a symmetric perturbation
of the prescribed strain amplitude and is rendered asymmetric only by the threshold
activation of Eq. (8). Equation (14) is the complete uncertainty map of this study: the
through-thickness property field Ei(z, T), the modulation wavelength and phase, the
coating thickness used in the property law and the relaxation spectrum are identical
in every realization, and only εapp
0
varies between realizations. The value of Leff is
reported in Table 1; it is a declared benchmark quantity of the reduced-order model
and not the coating thickness, since the compliance that absorbs a radial deviation in
the physical stage is that of the whole seal assembly rather than of the coating column
alone.
Standard Monte Carlo is retained as the reference estimator in preference to a spec-
tral surrogate such as Polynomial Chaos Expansion [24], for three reasons. First, the
response functionals of interest contain a threshold activation: the Macaulay bracket
in Eq. (8) switches subdomains between non-damaging and damaging regimes, so the
response has a kink in the random inputs even though it is smooth on either side
of it. A global polynomial approximation is least accurate near that kink, which is
also where the exceedance mass lies. Second, the targeted quantities include tail mea-
sures, namely 95th percentiles and the exceedance probability of Dcrit, for which plain
Monte Carlo gives unbiased estimates with quantifiable sampling error, whereas global
polynomial surrogates are least accurate precisely in the tails. Third, the reduced one-
dimensional core is inexpensive and the realizations are embarrassingly parallel, so the
full-model cost did not justify surrogate substitution. This is presented as a method-
ological choice among several valid uncertainty-propagation approaches, not as a claim
that PCE is inapplicable.
Sampling precision is assessed by nested subsample sizes rather than by a single
asserted convergence threshold. The reference ensemble comprises N = 800 realiza-
tions. Fig. 8a shows the exceedance-probability estimate with 95% Wilson confidence
intervals as a function of subsample size; the estimate stabilizes for N ≳400, and at
N = 800 the estimate is Pe = 0.076 with interval [0.060, 0.097].
For traceability, the exceedance counts underlying the nested estimates are stated
explicitly: 4/50, 10/100, 19/200, 34/400 and 61/800, giving ˆPe = 0.080, 0.100, 0.095,
0.085 and 0.076. The corresponding 95% Wilson intervals, obtained from the Wilson
expression
CI95 = ˆp + z2/2n ± z
p
ˆp(1 −ˆp)/n + z2/4n2
1 + z2/n
,
z = 1.96,
(15)
are [0.032, 0.188], [0.055, 0.174], [0.062, 0.144], [0.061, 0.116] and [0.060, 0.097]. The
reported reference value therefore corresponds to 61 exceedances out of 800 realiza-
tions, and the interval half-width contracts as N −1/2, as expected for a plain Monte
Carlo estimator.
The parameter sensitivity reported in Fig. 11b is computed separately from the
tolerance ensemble, by a deterministic one-at-a-time central-difference scheme, and its
definition is given here so that it can be reproduced. Each parameter θ ∈{Tmax, τ1, ng}
is perturbed by ±10% about its Table 1 value with all others held fixed, the response
24


being the through-thickness maximum damage Dmax = maxz D(z, tfinal) of the
deterministic modulated configuration. The raw index and its normalized form are
Sθ =
Dmax(1.1θ) −Dmax(0.9θ)

0.2 Dmax(θ)
,
¯Sθ =
Sθ
P
θ′ Sθ′ ,
(16)
so that ¯Sθ is a dimensionless elasticity normalized to sum to unity over the three
parameters. The evaluation requires seven solver runs: one baseline and two per param-
eter. The scheme is a local screening measure at the adopted operating point, not a
variance-based global index, and it is reported as such.
To cross-check the estimator, a third-order non-intrusive polynomial response
surface was trained and validated on the same reference ensemble: the N = 800 real-
izations are partitioned once into a training subset of 400 runs and a disjoint hold-out
subset of 400 runs, so that the surrogate is never evaluated on data used to fit it and
no additional solver runs are required. The hold-out validation gives R2 = 0.99999
for maximum stress and R2 = 0.99184 for maximum damage (Fig. 8b,c), where R2
is computed on the hold-out set against the 1 : 1 line. The surrogate reproduces
the reduced-order response closely, which is the expected outcome for a smooth one-
dimensional core driven by a small number of Gaussian inputs, and we report it as
such rather than as an argument against spectral methods. What the comparison does
show is where the two approaches differ: the residuals are largest in the upper tail,
precisely the region that sets Pe, so the surrogate is used here for continuous-output
approximation and sensitivity screening while the exceedance probability and its con-
fidence interval are estimated by Monte Carlo. For an extension of the core to two or
three dimensions, the quality of this fit indicates that a sparse or multi-element poly-
nomial chaos expansion would be a viable accelerator, with the present Monte Carlo
results as the reference solution.
25


Fig.
8:
Uncertainty
propagation
and
surrogate
verification.
(a)
Exceedance-
probability estimate against nested subsample size, with 95% Wilson intervals
recomputed from the exceedance counts 4/50, 10/100, 19/200, 34/400 and 61/800;
the estimate stabilizes for N ≳400 and reaches Pe = 61/800 = 0.076, [0.060, 0.097],
at N = 800. (b,c) Third-order non-intrusive polynomial response surface fitted on a
training subset of 400 realizations and evaluated on the disjoint hold-out subset of 400
realizations drawn from the same reference ensemble, giving R2 = 0.99999 for max-
imum stress and R2 = 0.99184 for maximum damage against the 1 : 1 line (dashed).
The markers are the hold-out set itself, so the quoted R2 can be recomputed from
them. The fit is close over the bulk of the response and degrades in the upper tail,
so the surrogate is used for screening and continuous-output approximation while the
exceedance probability is estimated by Monte Carlo.
5 Results and Discussion
5.1 Deterministic response and effect of microstructural
modulation
Simulations using nominal geometric dimensions and the benchmark material param-
eters are first performed to isolate the influence of functional grading and deposition-
induced microstructural modulation on the thermo-mechanical response of the
abradable coating.
For a monotonic FGM without modulation, the predicted stress field remains
relatively smooth through the coating thickness and does not exhibit pronounced
localized peaks. This behavior is consistent with the stress-mitigating effect of func-
tionally graded architectures, as reflected by the more moderate upper quantiles of
the maximum-stress statistics compared with the modulated case (Fig. 9a).
When periodic microstructural modulation is introduced, the stress response
becomes significantly more heterogeneous. Local stiffness fluctuations produce stress
hot spots at specific depths, promoting earlier damage initiation in selected subdo-
mains. This behavior is consistent with the stronger upper tail and percentile shift
observed in the cumulative probability distributions (Fig. 9a). The through-thickness
profile of Fig. 9b shows that the maximum equivalent stress increases from the free
surface towards the coating–substrate interface. This direction follows directly from
26


Fig. 9: Probabilistic stress response. (a) Cumulative probability distributions of the
maximum stress σmax for the monotonic FGM (solid) and the periodically modulated
FGM (dashed); the dotted vertical line marks the critical stress threshold, the dotted
horizontal line the 95% level, and the two dashed vertical lines the 95th-percentile
stresses of the two distributions. (b) Through-thickness distribution of σmax: the solid
line is the ensemble mean of the modulated FGM, the dashed grey line the correspond-
ing monotonic profile, and the shaded band the ±1σ envelope, all plotted against the
normalized depth below the free surface.
Eqs. (6), (7) and (10): with αc uniform the mechanical strain of Eq. (6) is essentially
uniform through the column, so the hereditary integral of Eq. (7) makes the local
stress track the local stiffness, which rises from the compliant dislocator-rich free sur-
face (Ecer = 12 GPa at ζ = 0) to the metallic-rich interface (Emet = 48 GPa at ζ = 1).
The same ordering is reflected in the depth-wise damage statistics of Fig. 10b. The
modulation superimposes a periodic perturbation of wavelength λg, i.e. five full peri-
ods across the thickness since λg/h = 0.2, on that trend, so that utilisation of the
threshold is highest in discrete bands rather than in one contiguous zone. The associ-
ated damage response is likewise accelerated: the periodically modulated FGM shows
faster mean damage accumulation over time and a larger separation between the two
damage trajectories (Fig. 10, Fig. 11). Overall, these results confirm that, while the
global functional gradient reduces overall stress levels, periodic modulation governs
the local maxima and therefore controls damage localization and kinetics.
5.2 Variability induced by geometric tolerances
Introducing geometric tolerances through Monte Carlo simulations produces substan-
tial dispersion in the mechanical response. The distribution of the end-of-cycle damage
is shown in Fig. 10a together with a kernel density estimate and the classification
level Dcrit = 0.10, at which a realization is classified as exceeding that level. This
level is a declared classification threshold rather than a measured material property,
corresponding to a 10% loss of effective stiffness; Fig. 10c reports the exceedance prob-
ability as a continuous function of it, so that the sensitivity of the comparison to the
selected level can be assessed and the ranking read at any level a designer adopts. The
27


distribution is strongly right-skewed. Its mean is 0.034 and its median 0.020, the bulk
of the ensemble lies well below the classification level, and yet 7.6% of the realizations
exceed it. The asymmetry is therefore of practical rather than cosmetic significance:
it is the exceedance mass beyond Dcrit, and not the central tendency, that governs the
reliability metric.
The fraction of realizations above the classification level is Pe = 0.076, with a 95%
Wilson interval of [0.060, 0.097] at N = 800, against 0.035 for the monotonic gradient
at the same level (Section 4.4). This confirms that geometric tolerances can produce
rare but severe degradation outcomes that deterministic simulations with nominal
dimensions cannot identify.
Depth-wise variability is further evidenced by the comparative dispersion across
normalized depth (Fig. 10b). Both the median and the upper quartile increase from
the free surface inwards, consistent with the through-thickness stress profile of Fig. 9b,
and the largest spread and the most extreme values occur in the modulation-controlled
bands near ζ ≈0.75 and ζ ≈0.96, while adjacent depths remain substantially less
damaged. The maximum of the median trend is reached at the modulation crest clos-
est to the interface rather than at the interface itself. Eq. (10) places the crests of the
sinusoidal term at z = λg/4 + kλg, i.e. at z = 0.1, 0.5, 0.9, 1.3, 1.7 mm, which in nor-
malized depth are ζ = 0.95, 0.75, 0.55, 0.35, 0.15; with M = 40 the subdomain centred
on the first of these lies at ζ = 0.9625. The crest nearest the interface is therefore
ζ ≃0.96, where the local modulus at the dwell temperature reaches 32.9 GPa against
31.6 GPa at the next crest inboard, ζ = 0.75. The outermost crest is consequently
the most heavily loaded band, and it, rather than the interface node itself, carries the
maximum of the median damage. This depth-dependence has direct practical implica-
tions for non-destructive inspection: sub-surface depths in the outer modulation crests,
i.e. from roughly three quarters of the coating thickness below the free surface down
to the interface, are systematically more damage-prone and should be prioritized in
evaluation protocols.
5.3 Combined probabilistic effects of grading, modulation, and
tolerances
A direct comparison between probabilistic responses for the monotonic FGM and
the periodically modulated FGM highlights the combined influence of microstructural
heterogeneity and geometric variability. Modulation increases both the rate and the
level of damage accumulation relative to the unmodulated case (Fig. 11a). When
geometric tolerances are added, response distributions broaden and exhibit increased
dispersion, as shown in Fig. 9a and Fig. 10a.
In both cases the mean damage increases monotonically with time, reflecting
progressive degradation under the applied thermo-mechanical loading. However, the
periodically modulated FGM exhibits consistently higher damage at all time instants.
At t = 60 s, the mean damage reaches 0.03376 in the modulated case compared with
0.02135 in the unmodulated case, an increase of 58%, confirming that modulation can
intensify damage kinetics and yield a more severe end-of-cycle state. Both values are
ensemble means of the end-of-cycle distributions and therefore coincide with the mean
of Fig. 10a. Damage begins to accumulate during the heating ramp, as soon as the
28


Fig. 10: Probabilistic damage response (N = 800 realizations, M = 40, ∆t = 0.25 s).
(a) Distribution of the through-thickness maximum damage Dmax = maxz D(z, tfinal)
at the end of the cycle, with a kernel density estimate; the vertical dashed line marks
the classification level Dcrit = 0.10 and the shaded area is the exceedance tail, con-
taining 61 of the 800 realizations, i.e. a fraction Pe = 0.076. (b) Dispersion of the
local damage with normalized depth: boxes span the interquartile range, whiskers the
extremes, and the marked line follows the median. Panel (a) aggregates over depth
and panel (b) resolves it, so the distribution of panel (a), whose mean is 0.0338, is
shifted above the local-damage distributions of panel (b), since each realization con-
tributes its through-thickness maximum to panel (a). (c) Exceedance probability as
a function of the declared classification level, for both architectures; the dashed line
marks the adopted Dcrit = 0.10.
expansion mismatch alone drives the equivalent-stress utilisation σeq/σcrit above unity
in the stiffer subdomains, and the gap between the two curves widens progressively
through the thermal dwell, because the modulated case activates in more subdomains
and accumulates faster in each.
Neglecting microstructural modulation therefore leads to systematic underesti-
mation of (i) the central tendency of damage growth and (ii) the probability of
critical exceedance. The depth-wise statistics further indicate that this interaction is
depth-dependent and not spatially uniform.
Fig. 11b reports normalized sensitivity indices for the parameters that the model
actually contains, computed by the one-at-a-time central-difference scheme defined in
Section 4.4. No friction-coefficient index appears, because the implemented formulation
contains no friction law (Table 2); the indices are normalized to sum to unity. The dwell
temperature dominates (0.86), through its effect on both the expansion mismatch of
Eq. (5) and the temperature-dependent moduli, followed by the leading relaxation time
(0.12); the gradient exponent contributes only marginally (0.02) because it reshapes
the property profile without changing the peak stiffness at the interface, where damage
localizes. The influence of the geometric tolerance is quantified separately, and directly,
by the ensemble dispersion of Figs. 9 and 10 rather than by a single scalar index.
29


Fig. 11: (a) Comparison of the ensemble mean damage D(t) for the monotonic
and periodically modulated FGM, with the divergence ∆D shaded; the two curves
terminate at 0.02135 and 0.03376 respectively, in agreement with the end-of-cycle dis-
tribution of Fig. 10a, and both remain below the classification level Dcrit = 0.10, so
the exceedance probability of Section 5.2 is generated entirely by tolerance-induced
dispersion. (b) Normalized local sensitivity indices, computed independently of the
Monte Carlo ensemble of panel (a) using the seven-run one-at-a-time central-difference
procedure of Eq. (16), at M = 40 and ∆t = 0.25 s.
5.4 Discussion and implications for coating reliability
Taken together, the deterministic and probabilistic results show that functionally
graded designs can reduce global stress levels but do not necessarily guarantee
improved durability when deposition-induced heterogeneity and geometric tolerances
are present. The acceleration of damage in the periodically modulated case and the
emergence of increased damage dispersion under tolerances demonstrate that local
stiffness modulation and dimensional variability can dominate durability outcomes.
The probabilistic results further show that tolerance-induced dispersion yields an
exceedance probability of Pe = 0.076 for the declared level Dcrit = 0.10, more than
double the 0.035 obtained for the monotonic gradient at the same level. The observed
trends are consistent with reliability and damage-mechanics perspectives reported in
the literature [8, 18].
From a validation standpoint it is important to state precisely what has and has
not been established. What has been established is numerical verification: the imple-
mentation reproduces closed-form solutions for the viscoelastic kernel, the thermal
eigenstrain and the damage kinetics (Table 4); the residual discretization errors at
the adopted resolutions are quantified against finer references (Table 3); the sampling
estimate is stable with quantified confidence intervals; and the reference estimator has
been cross-checked against a response surface validated on a disjoint hold-out sub-
set (Fig. 8). What has not been established is experimental validation. The damage
parameters are anchored on published data up to 300 ◦C, and the extension of the
benchmark to 400 ◦C is a model-based extrapolation (Section 4.3). The qualitative
trends, namely the stress-mitigating role of grading and the stress-amplifying effect of
30


periodic modulation, are independently supported in the literature [13, 16, 19, 20], but
the present numbers are benchmark outputs, not predictions for a specific coating.
Pathways for experimental validation of the framework include: (i) instrumented
thermal-cycling experiments on coupon-scale graded specimens with characterized
microstructural gradients and measured expansion coefficients; (ii) through-thickness
property identification by nanoindentation or ultrasonic mapping to measure ∆Eg and
λg directly; (iii) cyclic degradation tests at 400 ◦C to replace the present extrapola-
tion with measured kinetics; and (iv) for any future wear-oriented extension, dedicated
rub-rig testing with measured contact geometries, along the lines of the labyrinth-seal
rubbing campaigns reported by Pychynski [4] for honeycomb inlet liners, which would
additionally require an identified tribological law together with explicit contact and
sliding quantities that the present formulation does not contain.
6 Implications, Limitations, and Prospects
The proposed framework provides actionable guidance for the design and mainte-
nance planning of functionally graded abradable coatings in turbine labyrinth seals. In
particular, the results show that deposition-induced microstructural periodicity and
geometric tolerances can control the location and severity of damage, which motivates
their explicit inclusion during coating design and manufacturing specification. These
implications are stated within the declared scope: they concern architecture screening
and tolerance allocation for the benchmark system, not service-life prediction for a
specific coating.
6.1 Limitations
The main limitations of the present model are the use of a scalar isotropic damage
variable (valid only at the REV/subdomain scale established in Section 3.5, and used
only for macroscopic stiffness degradation rather than for crack-path prediction), the
neglect of irreversible viscoplastic effects, and the absence of coupled fluid–structure–
thermal interactions, each of which may affect quantitative predictions under high-load
or transient regimes. The following additional limitations follow from the declared
scope and are stated explicitly:
• No contact, friction or wear: the solver contains no rotor–stator contact algo-
rithm, no tangential sliding interface, no Coulomb friction law, no frictional heat
source and no material-removal kinetics. The mechanical excitation enters as a pre-
scribed equivalent normal-strain history. Consequently no wear depth, incursion
depth or abradability metric is predicted, and any such extension would require an
independently identified tribological law together with explicit contact and sliding
quantities.
• Porosity is homogenized: porosity enters only through the effective properties
of each subdomain and through its contribution to the modulation amplitude. Indi-
vidual pores are never resolved, so pore-scale stress concentrations are outside the
model. Moreover, because the temperature history is prescribed rather than solved
31


from a heat-conduction problem, the thermal-barrier role of porosity does not influ-
ence the solution; resolving it would require solving the coupled conduction problem
with a porosity-dependent conductivity field.
• Constant damage threshold: σcrit is an effective homogenized value held con-
stant through the thickness (Section 3.5). This is adequate for the global structural
response but cannot resolve local microstructural damage initiation; a spatially
varying threshold σcrit(z, T, ϕ) is the natural refinement.
• Calibration range. The damage kinetics are anchored on data at 300 ◦C and
assumed temperature-independent up to 400 ◦C, so the dwell-temperature predic-
tions are model-based extrapolations that may underestimate degradation, rather
than validated quantitative predictions.
• Benchmark parameter set: Expansion coefficients, relaxation times and modu-
lation parameters are declared benchmark values requiring material identification
(Table 1); the simulated case is not an identified model of a specific coating.
• Prescribed rather than solved loading: Both the thermal and the mechani-
cal histories are inputs. The framework therefore quantifies how a given excitation
interacts with material heterogeneity and dimensional variability; it does not predict
the excitation itself.
Future work shall focus on incorporating viscoplasticity and anisotropic dam-
age formulations, extending the model to transient fluid–structure–thermal coupling,
introducing a spatially variable damage threshold, and coupling the column to
an explicit contact and material-removal model should wear prediction become an
objective, and validating predictions experimentally using coatings with controlled
microstructural gradients. The probabilistic component can also be extended toward
stochastic optimization of graded architectures to minimize exceedance probability.
6.2 Practical implications for design and maintenance
The framework’s outputs map into the decision variables of coating development and
service practice, within the declared scope, as detailed below.
Manufacturing tolerance specification: geometric variability is a major source
of uncertainty and can increase the likelihood of exceeding the classification level.
Using Dcrit = 0.10, the end-of-cycle distribution gives Pe = 0.076 with interval
[0.060, 0.097] (Fig. 10a). This motivates tighter tolerance control to reduce the prob-
ability of exceeding the damage classification level. By re-running the Monte Carlo
analysis under progressively tighter tolerance bands and monitoring the resulting
reduction in exceedance probability, engineers can identify the tolerance tightening
that achieves a target reliability level while minimizing manufacturing cost [18, 24].
Coating design optimization: because the periodic modulation amplitude ∆Eg
and wavelength λg directly govern stress hot-spot intensity (Section 3.6), deposition
process parameters that control these quantities, such as spray angle, traverse speed
and powder morphology, can be linked to reliability outcomes. Designers can use
the framework to identify modulation amplitudes that keep the 95th-percentile stress
below a target, or to specify a gradient exponent ng that minimizes mean damage
at end of cycle [14, 15]. Explicit inclusion of microstructural modulation in design
32


models avoids underestimation of local stress hot spots and supports more realistic
optimization of the gradient profile.
Inspection prioritization: probabilistic mapping of high-damage outcomes sup-
ports targeted inspections. The depth-wise damage statistics (Fig. 10b) identify the
depth zones with the highest variance and most extreme values, suggesting that non-
destructive evaluation should be calibrated to detect damage at sub-surface depths,
around the modulation-controlled bands nearest the interface, at ζ ≈0.75 and
ζ ≈0.96, rather than near the surface. In a parallel effort within physics-informed
reliability engineering, our previous work [26] demonstrated that embedding fracture-
mechanics priors into deep learning improves remaining-useful-life predictions for
rolling-element bearings; as a perspective, the multiphysics damage data produced by
the present framework could extend such approaches through data-driven calibration.
We note explicitly that the present framework does not itself produce a remaining-
useful-life estimate, since that would require the service-life modelling that is outside
the declared scope.
6.3 Comparison with the Literature
The trends observed in this study are consistent with published experimental, ana-
lytical, and probabilistic investigations on graded materials, modulated coatings, and
structural reliability. Periodic modulation of material properties is known to promote
local stress amplification in graded and periodically structured media [19, 20]. This
is directly aligned with the present results, where the periodically modulated FGM
produces more localized stress hot spots and faster damage accumulation than the
monotonic FGM. In particular, Chen et al. [20] demonstrated experimentally that
modulation geometry governs both mechanical and tribological performance in nano-
multilayer coatings. This supports the central interpretation of the present framework:
microstructural modulation should not be treated as a minor geometric perturbation,
because it can reshape the local stress field and therefore influence damage initiation
and growth.
The importance of accounting for dimensional tolerances and uncertainty propa-
gation in structural performance assessment is well established in classical reliability
references [18, 23]. The present work extends this reliability perspective to abradable
coating analysis by propagating geometric tolerances through the full thermo-
viscoelastic–damage solver rather than evaluating uncertainty only at the level of
simplified output statistics. The modulated property field modifies local stiffness and
stress redistribution, while the sampled geometric deviation modifies the equivalent
mechanical input; their combined effect produces response distributions that cannot
be captured by deterministic simulations at nominal geometry.
Recent probabilistic fatigue and damage-modelling studies likewise report non-
negligible upper-tail probabilities under cyclic loading [25]. Those results provide
qualitative support for examining the response distribution rather than the nomi-
nal prediction alone. No direct quantitative comparison with the Pe reported here
is drawn, because the material systems, the loading conditions and the classification
33


criteria differ, and because Dcrit is a declared screening level rather than an experi-
mentally identified failure criterion; the two quantities are therefore not measures of
the same event.
Finally, some limitations should be borne in mind when comparing these results
with the broader literature. The absence of irreversible plasticity may lead to quantita-
tive deviations for coatings that exhibit pronounced viscoplastic deformation; the lack
of coupled fluid–structure–thermal dynamics limits direct applicability under fast tran-
sients; and comparisons with rub-rig or abradability studies are necessarily qualitative,
because the present formulation solves neither contact nor material removal.
7 Conclusions and Perspectives
This study developed a unified multiphysics–probabilistic framework for predicting
thermo-viscoelastic damage in functionally graded abradable coatings for turbine
labyrinth seals. The model integrates temperature-dependent viscoelasticity, ther-
mal eigenstrain and coating–substrate expansion mismatch, progressive damage,
deposition-induced microstructural modulation, and geometric tolerances within a
single reliability-oriented formulation. The central novelty lies in their unified treat-
ment within a single computational pipeline: coupling periodic property modulation
with Monte Carlo tolerance propagation produces nonlinear probabilistic response
distributions that decoupled analyses cannot replicate, and the resulting reliabil-
ity metrics, exceedance probabilities and sensitivity indices, are directly usable for
tolerance specification and inspection planning.
The results show that, although functional grading can reduce global stress levels,
deposition-induced microstructural heterogeneity may dominate damage localization
and accelerate degradation at specific depths. The probabilistic analysis further
indicates that geometric tolerances amplify response dispersion and increase the
exceedance probability, highlighting the importance of accounting for manufacturing
variability in reliability assessments. Consequently, deterministic analyses based on
idealized monotonic gradients can underestimate the likelihood of localized damage
and of exceeding the declared classification level.
The contribution is deliberately positioned as a numerically verified reduced-order
methodology. The solved domain is a local through-thickness coating column driven
by prescribed histories; explicit rubbing contact, friction, frictional heating, material
removal and wear-depth prediction are outside the formulation and are not reported.
The simulated case is a declared generic benchmark, and numerical verification,
established through closed-form unit tests, spatial and temporal refinement, sampling
convergence and a hold-out-validated response surface, is distinguished throughout
from experimental validation, which remains future work.
Overall, the proposed framework provides a practical basis for robust coating
design, tolerance control, and inspection planning. While demonstrated for abradable
coatings in turbine labyrinth seals, the framework is general and applicable to any
layered or graded system, including thermal barrier coatings, environmental barrier
coatings, and functionally graded structural components, where deposition-induced
heterogeneity and dimensional variability jointly govern reliability. Future work shall
34


incorporate viscoplasticity and anisotropic damage, a spatially variable damage thresh-
old, coupled fluid–structure–thermal interactions, and experimental validation using
graded coating systems with controlled microstructural features.
Nomenclature
D Scalar damage variable (0 ≤D ≤1), defined at the REV/subdomain scale.
Dcrit Critical damage classification level.
E(t, T) Temperature-dependent relaxation modulus.
E∞(T) Long-term (equilibrium) modulus in the Prony representation.
Em(T) m-th Prony-series modulus coefficient.
τm m-th relaxation time, held constant with temperature in the present benchmark.
σ(z, t) Viscoelastic stress response.
σcrit Effective critical stress threshold governing damage activation.
σmax Maximum stress statistic, σmax = maxt |σ(z, t)|.
A Damage rate coefficient (s−1).
md Damage exponent acting on the overstress.
nd Damage exponent acting on the saturation term.
Ei(z, T) Graded and modulated modulus in subdomain i at depth z.
Eeff Damage-degraded effective modulus, Eeff = (1 −D)Ei.
z Through-thickness coordinate, z = 0 at the interface, z = h at the free surface.
ζ Normalized depth below the free surface, ζ = (h −z)/h.
h Total coating thickness.
ng Functional gradient exponent.
∆Eg Amplitude of periodic microstructural modulation (GPa).
λg Wavelength of microstructural modulation.
ϕ Homogenized total porosity.
αc, αs Coating and substrate thermal expansion coefficients.
∆α Expansion mismatch, ∆α = αc −αs.
∆Tmax Peak temperature rise above Tref over the benchmark cycle.
Tref Stress-free reference temperature.
εth Thermal eigenstrain.
εmis Coating–substrate expansion mismatch strain.
εmech Mechanical (stress-producing) strain.
εapp Prescribed equivalent applied normal strain.
∆t Time step used in incremental integration.
tfinal Final simulation time.
M Number of through-thickness homogenized subdomains.
Mp Number of Prony terms in the viscoelastic series.
N Number of Monte Carlo realizations.
35


δu Vector of sampled geometric deviations (tolerances).
Leff Effective compliance length mapping a geometric deviation onto the prescribed
strain amplitude, Eq. (14).
Pe Exceedance probability of Dcrit.
Dmax Through-thickness maximum damage at the end of the cycle.
R2 Hold-out coefficient of determination of the polynomial response surface.
np, tr, td Number of approach pulses, ramp time and plateau time of the prescribed
strain waveform.
Declarations
Conflict of Interest
The authors declare no competing interests.
Data and Code Availability
The simulation code developed for this study, including the thermo-viscoelastic–
damage solver described in Section 4 and the Monte Carlo automation scripts used
for the probabilistic tolerance analysis in Section 4.4, will be made available upon
reasonable request to the corresponding author (felmellouhi@hbku.edu.qa). The code
implements the incremental thermo-viscoelastic–damage solver, the through-thickness
property-field construction, the thermal-eigenstrain and expansion-mismatch evalua-
tion, the damage-update procedure, and the Monte Carlo propagation of geometric
tolerances.
All deterministic and probabilistic simulation inputs required for reproducibility
are reported in the manuscript, including the nominal geometry, the through-thickness
discretization, the prescribed thermal and mechanical histories, the Prony parameters,
the expansion coefficients, the functional gradient and modulation parameters, the
damage parameters, the geometric tolerance definitions, the Monte Carlo settings, and
the post-processing metrics (Table 1). The refinement data of Table 3, the unit-test
tolerances of Table 4, and the surrogate validation metrics of Fig. 8 constitute the
verification record. Every quantity reported in more than one place is traceable to
Table 1 and to the equation that defines it: the peak mismatch strain of Eq. (2) to the
expansion coefficients αc and αs; the exceedance probability Pe = 0.076 to the count
61/800 and the Wilson interval [0.060, 0.097]; and the calibrated triplet (A, md, nd)
to the closed-form solution of Eq. (13). The calibration data used for anchoring the
damage-law parameters are derived from the published study of Bertuol [3] and are
therefore not redistributed independently; the calibration procedure and all parameter
values required to reproduce the simulations are documented in Section 4.3.
Acknowledgement
This work was supported by the Knowledge Transfer Program–Qatar (KTP-Q) project
No. KTPQ01-0530-240004 in partnership with ADGS Computer Systems, and by the
36


Mitacs Accelerate program under project IT47288. The statements herein are solely
the responsibility of the authors.
References
[1] Pathak, P., Dzhurinskiy, D., Elkin, A., Shornikov, P., Dautov, S., Ivanov, V.:
Enhanced high-temperature ysz-polyester abradable honeycomb seal structures.
Journal of thermal spray technology 31(1), 307–314 (2022)
[2] Baillieu, A., Parody, A., Rahimov, E., Garcia Panizo, J., Marshall, M.: In situ
measurements of thermal-mechanical wear in blade-abradable liner contacts. Pro-
ceedings of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers, Part C: Journal of Mechanical
Engineering Science 238(5), 1453–1465 (2024)
[3] Bertuol, K., Arendarchuck, B., Rivadeneira, F., Nolte, L., Lehner, M., Barnett,
B., Moreau, C., Stoyanov, P.: Assessment of alsi-based abradable coatings with
hbn and mocr additives for aerospace conditions: A novel high-temperature rig
approach. Aerospace Science and Technology, 110737 (2025)
[4] Pychynski, T., H¨ofler, C., Bauer, H.-J.: Experimental study on the friction contact
between a labyrinth seal fin and a honeycomb stator. Journal of Engineering for
Gas Turbines and Power 138(6), 062501 (2016)
[5] Schapery, R.A.: On the characterization of nonlinear viscoelastic materials.
Polymer Engineering & Science 9(4), 295–310 (1969)
[6] Lai, J., Bakker, A.: 3-d schapery representation for non-linear viscoelasticity and
finite element implementation. Computational mechanics 18(3), 182–191 (1996)
[7] Brinson, H.F., Brinson, L.C.: Polymer Engineering Science and Viscoelas-
ticity: An Introduction. Springer, New York (2008). https://doi.org/10.1007/
978-0-387-73861-1
[8] Lemaitre, J., Desmorat, R.: Engineering Damage Mechanics: Ductile, Creep,
Fatigue and Brittle Failures. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg (2005)
[9] Kachanov, L.M.: Introduction to Continuum Damage Mechanics. Mechanics of
Elastic Stability, vol. 10. Martinus Nijhoff Publishers, Dordrecht (1986). https:
//doi.org/10.1007/978-94-017-1957-5
[10] Hilton, H.H.: Elastic and viscoelastic poisson’s ratios: the theoretical mechanics
perspective. Mater. Sci. Appl 8(4), 291–332 (2017)
[11] Wineman, A.S., Rajagopal, K.R.: Mechanical Response of Polymers: An Intro-
duction. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK (2000)
[12] Ferry, J.D., Myers, H.S.: Viscoelastic properties of polymers. Journal of The
37


Electrochemical Society 108(7), 142–143 (1961)
[13] Wang, L., Wang, S., Chen, G., Zou, Y., Yu, S., Xie, E., Zhao, Q., Ye, Z., Ouyang,
J., Wang, Y., et al.: Ceramic-based abradable sealing coatings for advanced aero-
engines: Materials design, structural strategies, and multifunctional performance.
Extreme Materials 1(4), 33–58 (2025)
[14] Delfosse, D.: Fundamentals of Functionally Graded Materials— S. Suresh and A.
Mortensen IOM Communications Ltd, 1998 ISBN: 1-86125-063-0. Elsevier (1998)
[15] Miyamoto, Y., Kaysser, W.A., Rabin, B.H., Kawasaki, A., Ford, R.G. (eds.):
Functionally Graded Materials: Design, Processing and Applications. Materials
Technology Series, vol. 5. Kluwer Academic Publishers, Boston (1999). https:
//doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4615-5301-4
[16] Bertuol, K., Arendarchuck, B.E., Stoyanov, P.: An overview of metallic abradable
coatings in gas turbine engines. Coatings 15(10), 1216 (2025)
[17] Lokachari, S., Leng, K., Rincon Romero, A., Curry, N., Brewster, G., Norton,
A., Hussain, T.: Processing–microstructure–properties of columns in thermal bar-
rier coatings: a study of thermo-chemico-mechanical durability. ACS Applied
Materials & Interfaces 16(8), 10646–10660 (2024)
[18] Haldar, A., Mahadevan, S.: Probability, reliability and statistical methods in
engineering design. (No Title) (2000)
[19] Yıldırım, B., Kutlu, ¨O., Kadıo˘glu, S.: Periodic crack problem for a function-
ally graded half-plane an analytic solution. International Journal of Solids and
Structures 48(21), 3020–3031 (2011)
[20] Chen, Z., Lou, M., Geng, D., Xu, Y.X., Wang, Q., Zheng, J., Zhu, R., Chen,
Y., Kim, K.H.: Effect of the modulation geometry on mechanical and tribo-
logical properties of tisin/tialn nano-multilayer coatings. Surface and Coatings
Technology 423, 127586 (2021)
[21] Val, D.V., Chernin, L., Yurchenko, D.: Updatable probabilistic evaluation of fail-
ure rates of mechanical components in power take-off systems of tidal stream
turbines. Energies 14(20), 6586 (2021)
[22] Ditlevsen, O., Madsen, H.O.: Structural Reliability Methods. John Wiley & Sons,
Chichester (1996)
[23] Rackwitz, R.: Structural Reliability—Analysis and Prediction: R. Melchers, John
Wiley and Sons, Chichester, 1999, ISBN 0 4719 8771 9. Elsevier (2001)
[24] Sudret, B.: Global sensitivity analysis using polynomial chaos expansions. Relia-
bility engineering & system safety 93(7), 964–979 (2008)
38


[25] Li, H., Luo, X., Zhang, Y., Xu, R.: Stochastic fatigue damage in viscoelastic
materials using probabilistic pseudo j-integral paris’ law. Engineering Fracture
Mechanics 245, 107566 (2021)
[26] Dhibi, K., Nounou, H., El-Mellouhi, F., Nounou, M.: Physics-informed deep
learning for bearing remaining useful life: Adaptive paris-law regularization with
gaussian processes. Integrating Materials and Manufacturing Innovation, 1–21
(2026)
[27] Faraoun, H.I., Grosdidier, T., Seichepine, J.-L., Goran, D., Aourag, H., Coddet,
C., Zwick, J., Hopkins, N.: Improvement of thermally sprayed abradable coating
by microstructure control. Surface and Coatings Technology 201(6), 2303–2312
(2006)
[28] Liu, J., Ke, L.-L., Wang, Y.-S., Yang, J., Alam, F.: Thermoelastic frictional
contact of functionally graded materials with arbitrarily varying properties.
International Journal of Mechanical Sciences 63(1), 86–98 (2012)
[29] Kanit, T., Forest, S., Galliet, I., Mounoury, V., Jeulin, D.: Determination of the
size of the representative volume element for random composites: statistical and
numerical approach. International Journal of solids and structures 40(13-14),
3647–3679 (2003)
39
